---
title: Pen and Paper
---

A couple of years ago I went from working in an office to working remote mostly
from home. A couple of months in I realized how my productivity had dropped
significantly. For years everything I had to do and most of the planning around
it has lived in [Omnifocus](https://www.omnigroup.com/omnifocus "Omnifocus"). I
have even written [about it
before](https://unwiredcouch.com/2014/05/13/omnifocus.html "Omnifocus post").
For the rest of planning and notes I kept a handful of markdown files in a git
repo, held together by Makefiles and [a vim
plugin](https://github.com/mrtazz/vim-plan "vim-plan plugin"). But now it
didn’t work for me anymore. I kept opening OmniFocus just to find myself
aimlessly clicking and sorting things around. I redid the layout of my
perspectives again. Restructured all the GTD contexts and areas of focus. But
nothing actually changed. Looking at the app it just blurred with all the other
open windows. All the other apps. It became kind of meaningless. I realized
with 100% of work and interactions happening on my screen now, everything felt
the same to me. I was unable to focus on what I wanted to do. Planning was an
app switch away from coding was an app switch away from meetings was an app
switch away from my todos. There were many times where I caught myself cycling
from one thing to the other a couple of times within minutes. My attention was
completely shot. Additionally I had so many Omnifocus integrations set up that
were pulling in my JIRA tickets, my assigned code reviews, and even emails I
needed to reply to at some point. The longer I wasn’t using Omnifocus the more
it got cluttered with things that needed filing. Instead of helping me get
organized it did the opposite. I had over engineered Omnifocus having succumbed
to the idea that I'd be more productive the more I automate and fine tune it.

## Trying something new(-ish)
I needed to change things up. And the solution for this couldn't be another
app. It needed to be different. And it turns out this is a pretty normal thing
for humans. We link memories (which things to remember to do basically are) to
locations via the hippocampus.

> This is the reason it's important to have a designated place for each of our belongings - the hippocampus does the remembering for us if we associate an object with a particular spatial location.
>
> <p class="cite">
> &mdash; <cite>Daniel Levitin, The Organized Mind (p. 91)</cite>
> </p>

I’ve been carrying a Moleskine notebook with me since early 2008. Early on I
had already used it as a todo organizer before switching to Things and
eventually Omnifocus. I’ve used it on and off for random things (rarely enough
for it to last 10 years). And it’s been the testing ground every time I wanted
to get back to taking more analog notes. I’ve also backed the [Spark
Notebook](https://unwiredcouch.com/2015/03/18/spark-notebook-omnifocus.html
"Spark Notebook post") on Kickstarter and used that with a lot of success for a
while. So when I was looking to change things up from my digital routine I
remembered having read about the [Bullet Journal
method](https://bulletjournal.com/ "Bullet Journal method") and decided to give
it a try.

## Getting started with a Bullet Journal
For getting set up I started reading the website first and watched the
canonical intro video linked from there. But being used to this elaborate GTD
setup I wasn’t convinced that a minimalist way worked for me. I read a lot of
fairly  popular posts on getting started with bullet journaling from websites
like [this](https://littlecoffeefox.com/ "Little Coffee Fox") and [this
one](https://www.tinyrayofsunshine.com "Tiny Ray of Sunshines") and a ton of
other blog posts to understand how this is being used by different people. And
then I bought a new notebook and some pens and started with my own.

And I absolutely overdid it. I used a ton of color and differently sized pens
to denote headlines, priorities, etc. I had 2 different systems (dot stickers
and sticky labels) do denote important pages. And I added a ton of modules and
collections like trackers for workout, meditation, water intake, and reading
time. I had very elaborate monthly and weekly spreads, trying to recreate the
organizational cockpit that I always wanted Omnifocus to be. I put way too many
things to do in, areas of focus with color coded headings, and complicated time
blocking details. My daily spread had a [daily plan
bar](https://medium.com/rohdesign/the-daily-plan-bar-357972361096 "Rohdesign
Daily Plan bar") that included all my meetings and time blocks for the day. My
weekly spreads were as complicated and stuffed, at some point even including
which days to take out the trash. Bringing me to up to an hour of just setting
up my page to get started for the day. All to combat the feeling of not getting
things done and falling of the wagon again.

Of course once the initial excitement had worn off I fell back into seeing
maintaining this complicated thing as a chore and neglected it. And I ran into
the same problem I had with Omnifocus of having a layout that was very tuned to
my workdays. On the weekend or when I was taking vacation, it wasn’t useful.
And I hardly interacted with the journal. Leaving me again with the guilt of
“having fallen off”. One important difference though was that on those weekend
days and during time off where I couldn’t bother to get into my complicated
setups, when I did use the journal it resembled a lot more the original idea of
the Bullet Journal. And instead of giving up and changing back to Omnifocus, I
stuck with it.

## What my Bullet Journal actually looks like now
One of those vacations was at the end of last year. During that time I reduced
my usage of the journal to basically only a weekly spread. Mostly because there
wasn't much to keep track of. And I realized it still worked for me. I still
put all my todos and appointments in there. And it adapted to the difference in
usage wonderfully. I was also about to start my third Bullet Journal, having
journaled more than twice as much as the previous 10 years combined. I bought
the official [Bullet Journal book](https://bulletjournal.com/pages/book "Bullet
Journal Book") to learn more about the ideas and philosophies behind the
original approach given I had more belief it could work for me. And aside from
all the other interesting things in the book, the thing that really changed the
way I thought about it was that it's still supposed to be more like a journal
than a GTD system.

After finishing the book I slimmed down my Bullet Journal to the useful bare
essentials. I kept the original monthly layout I had already been using but
stripped down the monthly task list to a literal list instead of different
areas with colored headlines. The 2 page weekly spread turned into a single
page of tasks I want to get done over the course of the week. And the daily
spread is no longer a plan bar for a meticulously planned out day. It now just
starts with the date headline and serves 90% as a journal for recording the day
rather than a pre-planned skeleton of how I think the day will go. Because one
of the big reasons why I was often abandoning the journal was because they day
almost never turned out as planned. Making me feel like the journal was less
useful.

I kept marking the future log (which for me is the combined
[calendex/alistair](https://bulletjournal.com/blogs/bulletjournalist/future-log-inspiration
"Calendex Alistair Hybrid Future Log") method), monthly and weekly spreads, as
well as important collections with dot stickers. That way I can quickly find
e.g. the page with the last monthly spread if I want to look something up.

![dot stickers for bookmarks](/images/pen-and-paper/dot-stickers.jpeg "Dot Stickers")

And another big insight from the book was that I’m now leaning on
[migrations](https://bulletjournal.com/blogs/bulletjournalist/migration "Bullet
Journal Migrations") a lot more than I used to even though I don’t do daily
migrations anymore. I scan the last pages for the current week in the morning
for things that still need to get done and if they are a priority I move them
to the current day. However that rarely happens and it mostly a measure for me
to not forget about priorities. I do weekly and monthly migrations where I
thoroughly go through the pages and migrate items, add additional context, put
things into the future log (or the topic specific collections for things like
personal, work, apartment, etc that serve as a sort of backlog). But otherwise
I really just start a new headline every morning and start journaling.

## In Closing
Switching to paper for organizing my todos, thoughts, events, and planning
things has been absolutely wonderful for my stress levels and mental health.
Especially after trimming the process down to the minimum. I’m no longer
stressing about the perfect setup, but use the journal in the way that makes
the most sense for me in the moment. I still use a reminders list on my phone
for things on the go or when I don’t have the journal with me to migrate over
later. I’m much more focused and calm about organizing things when I’m able to
close my laptop and just open the journal, it feels much less noisy. Using pen
and paper so much every day also lead me to occasionally doodle on pages and
discover my interest in drawing and art which has been another huge source of
joy for me.
