---
title: Senior Rotations
date: 2023-06-27
url: "/2023/06/27/senior-rotations.html"
---

When I started at Etsy (this is end of 2011) onboarding meant spending the
first 6 weeks on different teams every week. The idea was to get to know some
people right away, outside of the team we'd be working on. And also learn a bit
about some areas that we were most likely going to be overlapping with in our
future work. And while this was generally fun and a good time it was also
during an already overwhelming time. So it wasn't rare that the week with a
team was over just when it felt like you understood what was kind of going on
(which was probably intended).

But we also had this concept of "Senior rotations", which to me always felt
like an extension of onboarding. And it was one of the most fun things I got to
do during my time there. The basic concept is that every Senior Engineer and
above (back then that meant Staff, Principal, and Distinguished) was entitled
to a 4 week rotation with a different team once a year. The idea was that for
one month out of the year the more experienced engineers from any given team
would be working on something completely different. Specifically we were
encouraged to pick a team that was working on something very different than
what our team was doing. And inversely every team was also hosting an engineer
for a month once or twice a year (which is what in my experience it usually
came down to).

The purpose of this - as it was explained to me - was multi-faceted. It was a
way to make sure senior people gain and maintain connections across the
organization, especially as the company was growing. Connections in the sense
of relationships, but also which problems are being solved elsewhere, and what
the impact is from changes in one part of the system to other parts of it. And
having intricate knowledge of some parts of the stack or the product can often
mean there are some good ideas ready to emerge when suddenly confronted with a
different area. Another idea - though I don't know how much that actually
worked -  was that it was a way to improve retention. For senior engineers that
might feel like they’ve gotten into a rut it was a way to experience work on a
different team and consider switching or find new excitement in their work. On
the flipside it also meant junior engineers get to learn from more senior
engineers from across the company. And it was a good way to build empathy for
other teams as well. In addition the "borrowing team" needed to regularly plan
for senior engineers to not be around. Which was good practice for handing
projects off, documenting work, and generally increasing the vacation factor
(the way better and less morbid version of the [bus
factor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bus_factor "Bus factor"), because let's
be honest we should be planning for people going on spontaneous vacation much
more than them being hit by a bus).

I've done two of those during my time at Etsy with wildly different
experiences. And most of it came down to preparation. I did one rotation where
I didn't really plan and prepped for it. It was also a team that I was already
closely working with in my regular day to day and I didn't make sure I wasn't
gonna have to work on projects for my original team. It was during a period
where there was a lot going on. So I wasn't disconnecting from the chatter and
questions for my team either. So all in all while I worked on some fun stuff
and learned things, it definitely wasn't really the change of pace and areas of
focus that I wanted it to be.

The following year I really wanted to do another rotation. And as it happens we
also had a reorg that meant my team was being disbanded and I was starting on a
newly created team anyways. The perfect opportunity to not have to worry about
any lingering projects or feeling like I abandoned my team mates during a time
of high stress. And the timing matched up so that I would start on the new team
after my summer vacation anyways. So it wasn't gonna matter much if I started a
month later anyways. This time I wanted to choose a team to rotate with that
was about as far away from my day to day working on infrastructure as I could
imagine. Which is why I was super excited to hear that the design system team
was hosting senior rotators, so I immediately signed up.

I didn’t have many expectations going into the rotation other than wanting to
learn about something completely different. Plus I’ve never liked the attitude
that there are inherent backend and frontend engineers and that you have to be
either one. It’s all just yelling at computers in different ways. So I was
excited to learn more about the frontend part of the stack. My general project
during that month was designing a versioning and deployment workflow for CSS
(specifically SCSS) changes that we wanted to support going forward as an
extension of the existing CSS build. The details are a bit fuzzy 7 years later.
But basically it was a project that was somewhat rooted in infrastructure in a
way that gave me a great starting point to talk to designers (who wrote large
parts of CSS and JS changes themselves back then) and engineers about their
requirements and workflows around CSS changes. I was in daily standups with the
design system team, got to hear about the daily challenges of designers and
frontend engineers, what goes into maintaining a design system, and most
importantly got to ask all the “stupid” questions that came to my mind. Plus as
my rotation mentor I had the fantastic [Katie
Sylor-Miller](https://sylormiller.com) who is one of the most frontend savvy
people I’ve ever met and I got to ask her all the questions as well. And I
can’t count all the things I learned during that time. I had fantastic
conversations about how to design for a brand in different shades of orange
(Etsy’s brand colour back then), the implications of designing maintainable
SCSS code organization, and just a whole bunch of things around design systems
and frontend development for a big, busy website.

All in all I really enjoyed that rotation and all the things I got to learn
through it and the people I got to know and hang out with for a month. I really
appreciated that I got to get out of my comfort zone for a bit and in some ways
“be a junior engineer” again. And it gave me insight into different parts of
the company that I probably would’ve never gotten otherwise. As I mentioned,
planning and executing senior rotations is a decent amount of effort. But I
think it’s a really fantastic idea and I’ve benefitted a lot from being able to
participate in it.
